In general, I like to
think about what I
call the regulation-innovation
trade-off.
So the key balancing act
will have to have in
our minds is that
innovation is good and
financial technology
has the power to
serve consumers well,
and make the markets
function more
efficiently but on
the other hand,
we worry that as we've
regulated the financial sector
more aggressively,
there's a tendency to move
traditional activity outside of
the more regulated spaces and
into some of these less
regulated environments,
and so just to be quite
clear about this,
I think that regulation can
ensure consumer safety and can
reduce the risks substantially
of market crises
like the recession,
and overall societal
pain that ensues
from these black swan events.
On the other hand
the regulation does
hinder the growth and
innovation by creating
bureaucratic hurdles
to innovation,
by creating bureaucratic
hurdles to advance.
It may also as
George Stigler was worried,
benefit incumbent firms and
tend to transfer risk in
the manner we've described
from regulated areas
of the market
to less regulated shadow sectors.
Innovation helps companies
create new products in
a safe and responsible way
that is going to best serve
consumers and allow
them to profit from
this substantial
technological advances
that have occurred
in recent eras.
On the other hand though,
there are real risks
of innovation.
The fact that consumers
aren't particularly
aware of the risks that
emerge in these markets,
things like security and
cyber crime risks that we'll get
a chance to discuss here.
It's interesting from
a conceptual perspective before
we dig deeply into
financial technology regulation
specifically to think about
how we as consumers in
these markets tend to view
the desirability or the
usefulness of regulation broadly.
This Gallup poll illustrates
that concerns about
regulation have actually
risen since the early 1990s
about overly burden
in some regulation
with consumers voicing
distrust in government's
ability to best
police these markets as
well as concerns that
bureaucratic red tape can
hinder significant
advancements that
occur in other countries with
less stringent
regulatory frameworks.
What's interesting
and important for
us to keep in mind is that,
regulation involves
the restriction
of industries ability to engage
in certain practices to
hopefully best serve
consumers in these markets.
Remember that this involves
two different classes
of consumers.
On the one side consumers who
are consuming
particular products,
on the other side those
who work in the
industries that are
being regulated who in
essence are also consumers.
Regulation is meant
to help consumers by
protecting them against risks
that emerge in different markets,
but regulation can also ill-serve
consumers by making
certain markets less
competitive and
providing incumbents or
tremendous advantage
in those faces.
This was of course the concern if
George Stigler and one that
manifests itself today
with respect to for example
occupational licensing
in the United States.
The percentage of
occupations that require
a state license in
order to participate
in that occupation have
increased from less than
five percent of workers in
the early 1950s to a quarter
of all workers in 2015.
Jobs that require
such licenses range from
jobs you would expect things
like physicians and lawyers,
but also very intense
licensing requirements
for occupations like barbers and
manicurists and the expectation
that they re-license
themselves with
tremendous regularity
in order to remain
licensed practitioners in
these particular occupations.
The existence of
these licensing requirements
does many things from
their perspective of consumers.
On the one hand, it makes
these occupations
more expensive to
work in and as a result makes
the prices that consumers
pay for their manicures,
and for their haircuts higher
but it also hurts
individuals who work
in these occupations because it
reduces worker mobility
and tends to increase
inequality and provides
a stark barrier
to entry for individuals who
seek to participate in
these particular industries as
a way for career advancement.